Chiricahua leopard frog: This spotted, green amphibian controls the insect populations. From tadpole to adult, this species depends on riparian zones to support every stage of their life. The absence of this species could indicate poor water quality. 
Southwest willow flycatcher: This brownish, feathery species has a special way of catching insects mid-air, known as “flycatching”.
Western yellow-billed cuckoo: This bird has a distinctive yellow beak, and commonly lay eggs in different nests to be raised and fed by new “foster” parents.
Mexican garter snake: This slithery, striped reptile’s diet mainly consists of frogs; is nonvenomous, and is beneficial to have both in riparian habitats and in your garden to control pests.
White-nose coati: This furry brown animal resembles a raccoon, and is a natural swimmer and climber. 
Grey hawk: This animal’s feathers are mostly gray, and it hunts small lizards and frogs in riparian areas. They have exceptional eyesight to hunt prey from above; they see 8 times better than the healthiest of human eyes.  
Sonoran mud turtle: This endangered species has a smooth, dark shell that protects it from predators and helps it blend in with the muddy bottoms of rivers and ponds. 
Gila topminnow: This small animal is found in shallow, warm water and used to be the most plentiful fish in the Gila River Basin until competition with non-native (invasive) fish populations caused its decline. 
Sonoran tiger salamander: This creature has yellow and black skin. Their slender body and tail help them move gracefully through the water and on land. They depend on riparian zones to keep their eggs moist and hidden from predators. 
Monarch butterfly: This winged insect is orange, poisonous, helps pollinate riparian plants, and travels thousands of miles throughout its migratory journey.
Western red bat: This species is known for its fiery red hair, and is the only type of mammal that can fly. It uses sounds, called echolocation, to hunt insects, which helps keep the insect population in check. 
Springsnail: This tiny creature has a spiral-shaped shell, and helps keep riparian areas healthy by eating algae and other waste in the water. 
Mule deer: This large, hoofed animal feeds on riparian plants and helps spread their seeds. They are known for their huge ears and black nose. 
Muskrat: This brown, medium-seized rodent looks similar to a beaver, and are the architects of riparian habitats. Their digging behavior helps shape waterways. 
Ornate tree lizard: This gray-ish lizard depends on riparian trees for safety from predators and for food, such as insects.
Desert cottontail: This plant-eater has a notably small, fluffy tail, large feet, and tall ears that help cool it down. It acts as an important food source for riparian predators. 